CS50 2018 Week 0

In your own words discuss Binary and its impact:

Binary is base-2 numeral system, represented by 0 and 1.
Example: 0, 1, 10, 11, 100  in base-2 corresponds to 0,1,2,3,4 in decimal numeral system.

Binary is so powerful because of its implementation, the binary system is used internally by modern
computers which uses binary digit or bit, the basic unit of information or data. A bit is usually
represented by an electrical voltage - if it is high it is 1 and when the voltage is low it is 0 or
by electrical state of flip-flop circuit switch when flipped on it is 1 and 0 when turned off.

CPU, the Central Processing Unit, which is the brain of the computer holds million and billions of
these "switches" or transistors. Through a series of steps, computers break down the commands given
into sequence of bits. These sequences can be interpreted and evaluated by CPU to give output on the screen.

In your own words discuss Algorithms as was introduced:

Algorithm is a set of instructions to solve the problem step-by-step. To write a computer program
we give the computer, an input, followed by step to step instructions, exactly what we want it to do.
The computer then executes the program, following each step mechanically, and gives the output.
The algorithm is the basic technique used to get the job done.

Once we have an algorithm we can put it in the form of flowchart or pseudocode and then write the
actual code that a computer can understand. The structure of the pseudocode is :

Input --> Process --> Output

For example: To find a sum of two numbers. We can solve this by writing out steps. Then convert the
steps to code.

Start
Input - Number 1 - x
	Number 2 - y
Compute Sum - S = x + y
Output - S
Stop

There are complex algorithms with which the output can be achieved much faster and have a
lot of impact on today's economy. For example, Google hangouts helps in sending and receiving live
audio and video chat, Google maps enables to find locations anywhere in the world etc. These algorithms
too started with a set of steps to accomplish a specific task.