CS50 Week 4 Discussions

1. Discuss the data structures that were mentioned in this lecture. These data types used the Struct
system to be created. Discuss their implementation and potential use cases.

Data structure is a way of organizing and storing data in a computer so that it can be accessed
and modified efficiently.

Different types of data structures are :

Array:

An array is a simple data structure consisting of a collection of elements of same data type stored
at contiguous memory locations.

Advantages:
Arrays are relatively easy to sort. Arrays allow random access of elements. This makes accessing
elements by position faster. Arrays have better cache locality that can make a pretty big difference
in performance.

Disadvantages:
Arrays have a fixed size, no flexibility. Also, inserting and removing elements in between the arrays
elements is not possible.

Linked-List

Linked List is a linear data structure. Unlike arrays, linked list elements are not stored at contiguous
location; the elements are linked using pointers.

A linked list is represented by a pointer to the first node of the linked list. The first node is called
head. If the linked list is empty, then value of head is NULL. In C, we can represent a node using
structures.
Each node in a list consists of at least two parts: data and pointer to the next node.

A simple real life example is a Train, here each coach is connected to its previous and next
coach (Except first and last). In terms of programming consider coach body as node value and connectors
as links to previous and next nodes.

Consider the history section of web browsers, where it creates a linked list of web-pages visited, so
that when you check history or press back button, the previous node's data is fetched.

Advantages over arrays
1) Dynamic size
2) Ease of insertion/deletion

Disadvantages:
1) Random access is not allowed. We have to access elements sequentially starting from the first node.
So we cannot do binary search with linked lists.
2) Extra memory space for a pointer is required with each element of the list.

Hash tables:

Hash table or associative array is a popular data structure used in programming. A hash table is just
a linked list with a hash function. A hash function basically just takes things and puts them in
different "baskets". Each "basket" is just another linked list or something else depending on how you
implement it. Hash table is a two-step process. First we need to run our data through a hash function
to get a hash code, and then we insert the element into the hash table at that hash code location.

Advantages:

Main advantage is synchronization.
In many situations, hash tables turn out to be more efficient than search trees or any other table
lookup structure. For this reason, they are widely used in many kinds of computer softwares, particularly
for associative arrays, database indexing, caches and sets.

Disadvantages

Hash collisions are practically unavoidable. when hashing a random subset of a large set of possible
keys.
Hash tables become quite inefficient when there are many collisions.
Hash table does not allow null values, like hash map.

Binary Tree:

Binary tree is one of the data structures that are efficient in insertion and searching operations.
Binary tree works on O (logN) for insert/search/delete operations. Binary tree is basically tree in
which each node can have two child nodes and each child node can itself be a small binary tree. Binary
tree works on the rule that child nodes which are lesser than root node keep on the left side and child
nodes which are greater than root node keep on the right side. Same rule is followed in child nodes
as well that are itself sub-trees.

Advantages:
Compared to linear search (checking each element in the array starting from the first), binary search
is much faster. Linear search takes, on average N/2 comparisons (where N is the number of elements in
the array), and worst case N comparisons. Binary search takes an average and worst-case log2(N)
comparisons. So for a million elements, linear search would take an average of 500,000 comparisons,
whereas binary search would take 20.

Disadvantages:

It’s more complicated than linear search, and is overkill for very small numbers of elements.
It works only on lists that are sorted and kept sorted. That is not always feasible, especially if
elements are constantly being added to the list.
It works only on element types for which there exists a less-than relationship.

Tries:

Tries is a tree that stores strings. Maximum number of children of a node is equal to size of alphabet.
Trie supports search, insert and delete operations in O(L) time where L is length of key. Tries combine
arrays, structures, and pointers together to store data.

Advantages:

With Trie, we can insert and find strings in O(L) time where L represent the length of a single word.
Trie is faster than Binary search tree. This is also faster than Hashing because of the ways it is
implemented. We do not need to compute any hash function.

We can easily print all words in alphabetical order which is not easily possible with hashing.
We can efficiently do prefix search with Trie.

Disadvantages:

The main disadvantage of tries is that they need lot of memory for storing the strings. For each
node we have too many node pointers(equal to number of characters of the alphabet).

2. Discuss memory management and its importance in compiler languages. Consider how memory management
was not thought about much in Javascript and try to consider the reasons why.

Memory management is basically to allocate the memory needed, use the allocated memory (read, write)
and release the allocated memory when it is not needed anymore. The part of using allocated memory is
explicit in all languages. The allocation and releasing the allocated memory are explicit in low-level
languages like C but are mostly implicit in high-level languages like JavaScript.

C is a systems programming language in which memory management is manual.There are two ways in which
memory can be allocated in C, by declaring variables,or by explicitly requesting space by allocating
memory dynamically. The standard library functions for memory management in C, malloc, calloc, realloc
and free, are the means of implementing dynamic memory allocation.

Malloc -  allocates the specified number of bytes
realloc	 - increases or decreases the size of the specified block of memory. Reallocates it if
needed
Calloc - allocates the specified number of bytes and initializes them to zero
Free - 	releases the specified block of memory back to the system

Most memory management issues arises when the allocated memory is not freed. The hardest task here is
to find when "the allocated memory is not needed any longer". It often requires the developer to
determine where in the program such piece of memory is not needed anymore and free it.

High-level languages embed a piece of software called "garbage collector" whose job is to track memory
allocation and use in order to find when a piece of allocated memory is not needed any longer in which
case, it will automatically free it.

The improper use of dynamic memory allocation can be a source of bugs. These can include security bugs
or program crashes, most often due to segmentation faults.

Most common errors are:

Memory allocation is not guaranteed to succeed, and may instead return a null pointer. Using the
returned value, without checking if the allocation is successful, invokes undefined behavior. This
usually leads to crash (due to the resulting segmentation fault on the null pointer dereference), but
there is no guarantee that a crash will happen so relying on that can also lead to problems.

Memory leak - Failure to deallocate memory using free leads to buildup of non-reusable memory, which
is no longer used by the program. This wastes memory resources and can lead to allocation failures when
these resources are exhausted.

Logical errors - All allocations must follow the same pattern: allocation using malloc, usage to store
data, deallocation using free. Failures to adhere to this pattern, such as memory usage after a call
to free or before a call to malloc, calling free twice ("double free"), etc., usually causes a
segmentation fault and results in a crash of the program.
