CS50 Week 3 Discussion

1. Talk about pointers and how they work in regards to memory to make strings work:

A pointer is a memory address or we can say a pointer is a variable whose value is the address of
another variable, i.e., direct address of the memory location. Like any variable or constant, you must
declare a pointer before using it to store any variable address. The general form of a pointer variable
declaration is −

type *var-name;

where 'type' is the pointer's data type and var-name is the name of the pointer variable. The asterisk  *
is used to declare a pointer which is called dereferencing operator. Dereferencing a pointer means getting
the value that is stored in the memory location pointed by the pointer.

int a = 10;
int* ptr = &a;
printf("%d", *ptr); // with *ptr dereferencing the pointer.

Pointers can save memory and run faster because it does not have to duplicate the data. It is always a
good practice to assign a NULL value to a pointer variable in case you do not have an exact address to
be assigned. This is done at the time of variable declaration. A pointer that is assigned NULL is called
a null pointer.

In C, a string is implemented as an array of characters, where the beginning of the array is at some
location in computer memory and there is a nul character (\0), which indicates the end of the string.
A disadvantage of creating strings using the character array syntax is that we must say ahead of time
how many characters the array may hold. We must specify maximum number of characters which we will ever
need to store in an array. This type of allocation, where the size of the array is determined at
compile-time is called static allocation. For example:

char name[10] = "Smith"; //5 characters

Another way of accessing a contiguous chunk of memory instead of with an array, is with a pointer.
Pointers only hold an address, they cannot hold all the characters in a character array. This means when
we use char * to keep a track of a string, the character array containing the string allocated statically
or dynamically must already exist. If we assign the pointer the address of an array of characters, the
pointer must be a character pointer that is the types must match.

Also, to assign the address of an array to a pointer, the address-of(&) operator is not used, since the
name of an array behaves like the address of that array.

Sometimes when we do not know how big a string is until run-time, we can allocate the string dynamically
using malloc() (memory allocation) function. Malloc() takes the number of bytes needed as its parameter
and gives us enough space for a string of the desired size. One thing not to be forgotten is 1 extra nul
character '\0' for the end of the string.

char *str = (char *)malloc(sizeof(char) * (length + 1));

When using malloc three rules to be remembered are: only things that we have malloced should be freed.
If statically declared an integer, int x;, that lives on the stack, you don't want to free x. So only
things that you've malloced should be freed.  And don't free something twice.
