CS50 Week 5 Discussions

1. Discuss HTTP and the creation of the web. Do some research on ARPANET and be ready to discuss
something you found about it.

HTTP (Hypertext Transfer Protocol) is a protocol for transferring the hypertext pages from Web Server
to Web Browser. For exchanging web pages between Server and Browser, an HTTP session is setup using
protocol methods (e.g. GET, POST etc.). HTTP used by the World Wide Web to define how messages are
formatted and transmitted, and what actions Web servers and browsers should take in response to various
commands.

For example, when you enter a URL in your browser, this actually sends an HTTP command to the Web
server redirecting it to fetch and transmit the requested Web page. The other main standard that
controls how the World Wide Web works is HTML, which covers how Web pages are formatted and displayed.

HTTP specifies exactly how one must make a request for a web page and exactly how a server, a machine
that hosts web pages, delivers that information back to clients.

There are HTTP status codes which are response codes given by Web servers and help identify the cause
of the problem. For example, "404 File Not Found" is a common HTTP status code. It means the Web server
cannot find the file you requested. This means the webpage or other document tried to load in your Web
browser has either been moved or deleted, or you entered the wrong URL.

Knowing the meaning of the HTTP status code can help you figure out what went wrong. On a 404 error, for
example, you could look at the URL to see if a word looks misspelled, then correct it and try it again.
If that doesn't work, backtrack by deleting information between each backslash, until you come to a page
on that site that isn't a 404. From there you may be able to find the page you're looking for.

The Advanced Research Projects Agency Network (ARPANET) was the first wide area packet switching network
and the first network to implement the protocol suite TCP/IP. Both technologies became the technical
foundation of the Internet. So ARPANET was the network that became the basis for the Internet. The ARPANET
was initially funded by the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) of the United States Department of
Defense.

In 1969, the idea became reality with the interconnection of four university computers in southwestern
US (UCLA, Stanford Research Institute, UCSB, and the University of Utah).


2. Discuss the importance of TCP/IP and the power it awarded the internet. What was the purpose of
creating IP/V6?

Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and Internet Protocol (IP) are two distinct computer network
protocols. TCP/IP, are standard Internet communications protocols that allow digital computers to
communicate over long distances.Transmission Control Protocol divides a message or file into packets
that are transmitted over the internet and then reassembled when they reach their destination. Internet
Protocol is responsible for the address of each packet so it is sent to the correct destination.

IP:
. Route data from sender to receiver.
. Define an IP address.

TCP:
. Ensure data arrives to the receiver.
. Ensure the data is in order.
. Control speed at which data is sent (congestion control algorithm)

TCP/IP is very important because the whole internet is based on it. Without TCP/IP the data communication
and Internet is not possible.

IP/V6:

IP/v6 is Internet Protocol version 6 designed to replace IP/v4.

In order to communicate over the Internet, computers and other devices must have sender and receiver
addresses. These numeric addresses are known as Internet Protocol addresses (IP Address). As the
Internet and the number of people using it grows exponentially, so does the need for IP addresses.

IPv6 allows more users and devices to communicate on the Internet by using bigger numbers to create
IP addresses. Under IPv4, every IP address is 32 bits long, which allows 4.3 billion unique addresses.
An example IPv4 address is:

172.16.254.1

In comparison, IPv6 addresses are 128 bits, which allow for approximately three hundred and forty
trillion, trillion unique IP addresses. An example IPv6 address is:

2001:db8:ffff:1:201:02ff:fe03:0405

IPv6 offers other networking advantages. In most cases, computers and applications will detect and
take advantage of IPv6-enabled networks and services without requiring any action from the user. IPv6
also relieves other networking issues that can arise due to the limited number of addresses available
on IPv4.